You must translate: 'tis fit weunderstand them.
Where is your son?
Bestow this place on us a littlewhile.
O, my own lord, what have I seento-night!
What, Gertrude?
How does Hamlet?
Mad as the sea and wind,
when both contend Which is themightier:
in his lawless fit,
Behind the arras hearingsomething stir,
Whips out his rapier, cries, "Arat, a rat!"
And, in this brainishapprehension,
kills The unseen good old man.
O heavy deed!
It had been so with us, had webeen there:
His liberty is full of threatsto all;
To you yourself, to us, to everyone.
Alas, how shall this bloody deedbe answer'd?
It will be laid to us,
whose providence Should havekept short,
restrain'd and out of haunt,
This mad young man: but so muchwas our love,
We would not understand what wasmost fit;
But, like the owner of a fouldisease
To keep it from divulging,
let it feed Even on the pith ofLife.
Where is he gone?
To draw apart the body he hathkill'd:
O'er whom his very madness,
like some ore Among a mineral ofmetals base,
Shows itself pure; he weeps forwhat is done.
O Gertrude, come away!
The sun no sooner shall themountains touch,
But we will ship him hence: andthis vile deed We must,
with all our majesty and skill,Both countenance and excuse.
Ho, Guildenstern!
Friends both, go join you withsome further aid:
Hamlet in madness hath Poloniusslain,
And from his mother's closethath he dragg'd him:
Go seek him out; speak fair,
and bring the body Into thechapel.
Gertrude, come away.
My soul is full of discord anddismay.
Safely stowed.
Hamlet!
Lord Hamlet!
What noise?
Who calls on Hamlet?
O, here they come.
What have you done, my lord,with the dead body?
Compounded it with dust, whereto'tis kin.
Tell us where 'tis,
that we may take it thence Andbear it to the chapel.
Do not believe it.
Believe what?
That I can keep your counsel andnot mine own.
Besides, to be demanded of asponge!
What replication should be madeby the son of a king?
Take you me for a sponge, mylord?
Ay, sir, that soaks up theking's countenance,
his rewards, his authorities.
But such officers do the kingbest service in the end:
he keeps them, like an ape anapple,
in the corner of his jaw;
first mouthed, to be lastswallowed.
When he needs what you havegleaned,
it is but squeezing you, and,sponge,
you shall be dry again.
I understand you not, my lord.
I am glad of it.
A knavish speech sleeps in afoolish ear.
My lord, you must tell us wherethe body is
and go with us to the king.
The body is with the king,
but the king is not with thebody.
The king is a thing--
A thing, my lord!
Of nothing.
Bring me to him.
Hide fox, and all after.
I have sent to seek him and tofind the body.
How dangerous is it that thisman goes loose!
Yet must we not put the stronglaw on him.
He's loved of the distractedmultitude,
Who like not in their judgment,but their eyes;
And where 'tis so, theoffender's scourge is weigh'd,
But never the offence.
To bear all smooth and even,
This sudden sending him awaymust seem Deliberate pause:
diseases desperate grown Bydesperate appliance
are relieved, Or not at all.
How now!
What hath befall'n?
Where the dead body is bestow'd,my lord,
We cannot get from him.
But where is he?
Without, my lord; guarded, toknow your pleasure.
Bring him before us.
Ho, Guildenstern!
Bring in the lord.
Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?
At supper.
At supper! Where?
Not where he eats, but where heis eaten.
A certain convocation of politicworms are e'en at him.
Your worm is your only emperorfor diet.
We fat all creatures else to fatus,
and we fat ourselves formaggots.
Your fat king and your leanbeggar
is but variable service,
two dishes, but to one table:that's the end.
Alas, alas!
Man may fish with the worm thathath eat of a king
and eat of the fish that hathfed of that worm.
What dost thou mean by this?
Nothing but to show you how aking may go a progress
through the guts of a beggar.
Where's Polonius?
In heaven; send thither to see:
if your messenger find him notthere,
seek him in the other placeyourself.
But indeed, if you find him notwithin this month,
You shall nose him as you go upthe stairs into the lobby.
Go seek him there.
He will stay till you come.
Hamlet, this deed, for thineespecial safety--
Which we do tender,
as we dearly grieve For thatwhich thou hast done--
must send thee hence With fieryquickness:
therefore prepare thyself; Thebark is ready,
the wind at help, The associatestend,
and every thing is bent ForEngland.
For England!
Ay, Hamlet.
Good.
So is it, if thou knew'st ourpurposes.
I see a cherub that sees them.
But, come; for England!
Farewell, dear mother.
Thy loving father, Hamlet.
My mother:
father and mother is man andwife;
man and wife is one flesh; andso, my mother.
Come, for England!
Follow him at foot; tempt himwith speed aboard;
Delay it not; I'll have himhence to-night.
And, England, if my love thouhold'st at aught,
thou mayst not coldly set Oursovereign process;
which imports at full,
By letters congruing to thateffect,
The present death of Hamlet.
Do it, England; For like thehectic in my blood he rages,
And thou must cure me: till Iknow 'tis done,
Howe'er my haps, my joys werene'er begun.
Go, captain, from me greet theDanish king;
Tell him that, by his license,
Fortinbras Craves the conveyance
of a promised march Over hiskingdom.
You know the rendezvous.
If that his majesty would aughtwith us,
We shall express our duty in hiseye; And let him know so.
I will do't, my lord.
Go softly on.
Good sir, whose powers arethese?
They are of Norway, sir.
How purposed, sir, I pray you?
Against some part of Poland.
Who commands them, sir?
The nephew of old Norway,Fortinbras.
Goes it against the main ofPoland, sir,
Or for some frontier?
Truly to speak, and with noaddition,
We go to gain a little patch ofground
That hath in it no profit butthe name.
To pay five ducats, five, Iwould not farm it.
Why, then the Polack never willdefend it.
Yes, it is already garrison'd.
I humbly thank you, sir.
Wilt please you go, my lord?
I'll be with you straight go alittle before.
How all occasions do informagainst me
And spur my dull revenge!
What is a man,
If his chief good and market ofhis time
Be but to sleep and feed?
A beast, no more.
Sure, he that made us with suchlarge discourse,
Looking before and after,
gave us not That capability andgod-like reason
To fust in us unused.
Now, whether it be Bestialoblivion
or some craven scruple
Of thinking too precisely on theevent,
I do not know Why yet I live tosay,
"This thing's to do."
I have cause and will andstrength and means To do't.
Examples gross as earth exhortme:
Witness this army of such massand charge
Led by a delicate and tenderprince,
Whose spirit with divineambition puff'd
Makes mouths at the invisibleevent,
Exposing what is mortal andunsure To all that fortune,
death and danger dare, Even foran egg-shell.
Rightly to be great Is not tostir without great argument,
But greatly to find quarrel in astraw
When honour's at the stake.
How stand I then, That have afather kill'd,
a mother stain'd, Excitements ofmy reason and my blood,
And let all sleep?
While, to my shame, I see Theimminent death
of twenty thousand men, That,
for a fantasy and trick of fame,Go to their graves like beds,
fight for a plot Whereon thenumbers cannot try the cause,
Which is not tomb enough andcontinent To hide the slain?
O, from this time forth, Mythoughts be bloody,
or be nothing worth!
I will not speak with her.
She is importunate, indeeddistract.
Her mood will needs be pitied.
What would she have?
She speaks much of her father;
says she hears There's tricks i'the world;
and hems, and beats her heart;
Spurns enviously at straws;speaks things in doubt,
That carry but half sense: herspeech is nothing,
Yet the unshaped use of it
doth move her hearers tocollection.
They yawn at it,
And botch the words up fit totheir own thoughts;
Which, as her winks and nods andgestures yield them,
Indeed would make one thinkthere might be thought,
Though nothing sure, yet muchunhappily.
It were good she were spokenwith;
for she may strew Dangerousconjectures
in ill-breeding minds.
Let her come in.
To my sick soul, as sin's truenature is,
Each toy seems prologue to somegreat amiss:
So full of artless jealousy isguilt;
It spills itself in fearing tobe spilt.
Where is the beauteous majestyof Denmark?
How now, Ophelia!
How should I your true love knowFrom another one?
By his cockle hat and staff, Andhis sandal shoon.
Alas, sweet lady, what importsthis song?
Say you?
Nay, pray you, mark.
He is dead and gone, lady, He isdead and gone;
At his head a grass-green turf,
At his heels a stone.
Nay, but, Ophelia.
Pray you, mark.
White his shroud as the mountainsnow.
Larded with sweet flowers Whichbewept to the grave--
Alas, look here.
Did not go With true-loveshowers.
How do you, pretty lady?
Well.
God dild you!
They say the owl was a baker'sdaughter.
Lord, we know what we are, butknow not what we may be.
God be at your table!
Conceit upon her father.
Pray let's have no words ofthis;
but when they ask you what itmeans, say you this:
To-morrow is Saint Valentine'sday,
All in the morning betime, And Ia maid at your window,
To be your Valentine.
Then up he rose and donn'd hisclothes
And dupp'd the chamber-door;
Let in a maid, let out a maid,
Never departed more.
Pretty Ophelia!
Indeed, la, without an oath,I'll make an end on't:
By Gis and by Saint Charity,
Alack, and fie for shame!
Young men will do't, if theycome to't;
By cock, they are to blame.
Quoth she, before you tumbledme,
You promised me to wed.
He answers:
So would I ha' done, by yondersun,
An thou hadst not come to mybed.
How long hath she been thus?
I hope all will be well.
We must be patient: but I cannotchoose but weep,
to think they would lay him inthe cold ground.
My brother shall know of it!
And so I thank you for your goodcounsel.
Come, my coach!
Good night, ladies; good night,sweet ladies;
good night, good night.
Follow her close; give her goodwatch, I pray you.
O, this is the poison of deepgrief;
it springs All from her father'sdeath.
And now behold.
O Gertrude, Gertrude, Whensorrows come,
they come not single spies Butin battalions.
First, her father slain: Next,your son gone;
and he most violent author Ofhis own just remove:
the people muddied,
Thick and unwholesome in theirthoughts and whispers,
For good Polonius' death;
and we have done but greenly, Inhugger-mugger to inter him.
Poor Ophelia Divided fromherself and her fair judgment,
Without the which we arepictures,
or mere beasts:
Last, and as much containing asall these,
Her brother is in secret comefrom France
and wants not buzzers to infecthis ear
With pestilent speeches of hisfather's death.
O my dear Gertrude, this, Liketo a murdering-piece,
in many places Gives mesuperfluous death.
Alack, what noise is this?
Attend! Where are my Swissers?
Let them guard the door.
What's the matter?
Save yourself, my lord:
The ocean, overpeering of hislist,
Eats not the flats with moreimpetuous haste
Than young Laertes, in a riotoushead,
O'erbears your officers.
The rabble call him lord;
And, as the world were now butto begin,
Antiquity forgot, custom notknown,
They cry, "Choose we; Laertesshall be king."
Caps, hands, and tongues,applaud it to the clouds:
"Laertes shall be king, Laertesking!"
How cheerfully on the falsetrail they cry!
O, this is counter, you falseDanish dogs!
The doors are broke.
Where is this king?
O thou vile king, Give me myfather!
Calmly, good Laertes.
That drop of blood that's calmproclaims me bastard,
Cries cuckold to my father,brands the harlot Even here,
between the chaste unsmirchedbrow Of my true mother.
What is the cause, Laertes,
That thy rebellion looks sogiant-like?
Let him go, Gertrude; do notfear our person:
There's such divinity doth hedgea king
That treason can but peep towhat it would,
Acts little of his will.
Tell me, Laertes, Why thou artthus incensed.
Let him go, Gertrude.
Speak, man.
Where is my father?
Dead.
But not by him.
Let him demand his fill.
How came he dead?
I'll not be juggled with: Tohell, allegiance!
Vows, to the blackest devil!
Conscience and grace, to theprofoundest pit!
I dare damnation.
To this point I stand,
That both the worlds I give tonegligence,
Let come what comes;
only I'll be revenged Mostthroughly for my father.
Who shall stay you?
My will, not all the worlds.
Good Laertes, If you desire toknow the certainty
Of your dear father, is't writin your revenge,
That, swoopstake,
you will draw both friend andfoe, Winner and loser?
None but his enemies.
Will you know them then?
To his good friends thus wideI'll ope my arms;
And like the kind life-renderingpelican,
Repast them with my blood.
Why, now you speak Like a goodchild
and a true gentleman.
That I am guiltless of yourfather's death
And am most sensibly in grieffor it,
It shall as level to yourjudgment pierce
As day does to your eye.
How now!
What noise is that?
O heat, dry up my brains!
Tears seven times salt,
Burn out the sense and virtue ofmine eye!
By heavens, thy madness shall bepaid with weight
Till our scale turn the beam.
O rose of May!
Dear maid, kind sister, sweetOphelia!
O heavens!
Is't possible a young maid'swits
Should be as mortal as an oldman's life?
Nature is fine in love, andwhere 'tis fine,
It sends some precious instanceof itself after the thing itloves.
They bore him barefaced on thebier;
Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny;
And in his grave rain'd many atear.
Fare you well, my dove!
Hadst thou thy wits and didstpersuade revenge,
It could not move thus.
You must sing a-down a-down, An'you call him a-down-a.
O, how the wheel becomes it!
It is the false steward thatstole his master's daughter.
This nothing's more than matter.
There's rosemary, that's forremembrance;
pray you, love, remember.
There's pansies.
That's for thoughts.
A document in madness, thoughtsand remembrance fitted.
There's fennel for you, andcolumbines.
There's rue for you; and there'ssome for me.
We may call it herb-grace o'Sundays:
O you must wear your rue with adifference.
There's a daisy.
I would give you some violets,
but they withered all when myfather died.
They say he made a good end.
For bonny sweet Robin is all myjoy.
Thought and affliction, passion,hell itself,
She turns to favour and toprettiness.
Will he not come again?
And will he not come again?
No, no, he is dead: Go to thydeath-bed:
He never will come again.
His beard was as white as snow,
All flaxen was his poll:
He is gone, he is gone, And wecast away moan:
God ha' mercy on his soul!
And of all Christian souls, Ipray God.
God buy you.
Do you see this, O God?
Laertes.
I must commune with your grief,
Or you deny me right.
Go but apart,
Make choice of whom your wisestfriends you will.
And they shall hear and judge'twixt you and me:
If by direct or by collateralhand
They find us touch'd, we willour kingdom give,
Our crown, our life, and allthat we call ours
To you in satisfaction; but ifnot,
Be you content to lend yourpatience to us,
And we shall jointly labour withyour soul
To give it due content.
Let this be so;
His means of death, his obscurefuneral--
No trophy, sword, nor hatchmento'er his bones,
No noble rite nor formalostentation--
Cry to be heard, as 'twere fromheaven to earth,
That I must call't in question.
And so you shall;
And where the offence is let thegreat axe fall.
God bless you, sir.
Let him bless thee too.
That shall, sir, and please him.
There's a letter for you, sir.
It came from the ambassador thatwas bound for England;
if your name be Horatio, as I amlet to know it is.
"Horatio, when thou shalt haveoverlooked this,
"give these fellows some meansto the king:
"they have letters for him.
"Ere we were two days old atsea,
"a pirate of very warlikeappointment gave us chase.
"Finding ourselves too slow ofsail,
"we put on a compelled valour,
"and in the grapple I boardedthem:
"on the instant they got clearof our ship;
"so I alone became theirprisoner.
"They have dealt with me likethieves of mercy:
"but they knew what they did;
"I am to do a good turn forthem.
"Let the king have the letters Ihave sent;
"and repair thou to me with asmuch speed
"as thou wouldst fly death.
"I have words to speak in thineear will make thee dumb;
"yet are they much too light forthe bore of the matter.
"These good fellows will bringthee where I am.
"Rosencrantz and Guildensternhold their course for England:
"of them I have much to tellthee.
"Farewell.
He that thou knowest thine,--Hamlet."
Come, I will give you way forthese your letters;
And do it the speedier that youmay direct me To him
from whom you brought them.
Now must your conscience myacquaintance seal,
And you must put me in yourheart for friend,
Sith you have heard, and with aknowing ear,
That he which hath your noblefather slain
Pursued my life.
It well appears.
But tell me Why you proceedednot against these feats,
So crimeful and so capital innature,
As by your safety, wisdom, allthings else,
You mainly were stirr'd up.
O, for two special reasons;
Which may to you, perhaps, seemmuch unsinew'd,
But yet to me they are strong.
The queen his mother Livesalmost by his looks;
and for myself--
My virtue or my plague, be iteither which--
She's so conjunctive to my lifeand soul,
That, as the star moves not butin his sphere,
I could not but by her.
The other motive, Why to apublic count I might not go,
Is the great love the generalgender bear him;
Who, dipping all his faults intheir affection,
Would, like the spring thatturneth wood to stone,
Convert his gyves to graces.
And so have I a noble fatherlost;
A sister driven into desperateterms,
Whose worth, if praises may goback again,
Stood challenger on mount of allthe age
For her perfections: but myrevenge will come.
Break not your sleeps for that:
you must not think That we aremade of stuff so flat and dull
That we can let our beard beshook with danger
And think it pastime.
You shortly shall hear more:
I loved your father, and we loveourself;
And that, I hope, will teach youto imagine--
How now! What news?
Letters, my lord, from Hamlet:
These to your majesty; this tothe queen.
From Hamlet!
Who brought them?
Sailors, my lord, they say; Isaw them not:
They were given me by Claudio;
he received them Of him thatbrought them.
Laertes, you shall hear them.
Leave us.
"High and mighty,
"You shall know I am set nakedon your kingdom.
"To-morrow shall I beg leave tosee your kingly eyes:
"when I shall, first asking yourpardon thereunto,
"recount the occasion of mysudden and more strange return.
--Hamlet."
What should this mean?
Are all the rest come back?
Or is this some abuse, and nosuch thing?
Know you the hand?
'Tis Hamlet's character.
"Naked!"
And in a postscript here, hesays "alone."
Can you advise me?
I'm lost in it, my lord.
But let him come;
It warms the very sickness in myheart
That I shall live and tell himto his teeth,
"Thus didest thou."
If it be so, Laertes-- thus howshould it be so?
How otherwise?
Will you be ruled by me?
Ay, my lord; So you will noto'errule me to a peace.
To thine own peace.
If he be now return'd, Aschecking at his voyage,
and that he means No more toundertake it,
I will work him To an exploit,now ripe in my device,
Under the which he shall notchoose but fall:
And for his death no wind ofblame shall breathe,
But even his mother shalluncharge the practice
And call it accident.
My lord, I will be ruled; Therather,
if you could devise it so That Imight be the organ.
It falls right.
You have been talk'd of sinceyour travel much,
And that in Hamlet's hearing,
for a quality Wherein, they say,you shine.
Two months since, Here was agentleman of Normandy.
He made confession of you
And gave you such a masterlyreport For art and exercise
in your defence And for yourrapier most especial
That he cried out,
'twould be a sight indeed If onecould match you.
This report of his Did Hamlet soenvenom
with his envy That he couldnothing do
but wish and beg Your suddencoming o'er
to play with you.
Now, out of this.
What out of this, my lord?
Laertes, was your father dear toyou?
Or are you like the painting ofa sorrow,
A face without a heart?
Why ask you this?
Not that I think you did notlove your father;
But that I know love is begun bytime;
And that I see, in passages ofproof,
Time qualifies the fire andspark of it.
There lives within the veryflame of love
A kind of wick or snuff thatwill abate it;
And nothing is at a likegoodness still;
But goodness, growing to apleurisy,
Dies in his own too much.
But, to the quick o' the ulcer.
Hamlet comes back: what wouldyou undertake
To show yourself in deed
your father's son More than inwords?
To cut his throat i' the church.
No place, indeed, should murdersanctuarize;
Revenge should know no bounds.
But, good Laertes, Will you dothis,
keep close within your chamber.
Hamlet return'd shall know youare come back.
We'll put on those shall praiseyour excellence
And set a double varnish on thefame The Frenchman gave you,
bring you in fine together Andwager on your heads:
he, being remiss, Most generousand free from all contrivings,
Will not peruse the foils; sothat, with ease,
Or with a little shuffling, youmay choose A sword unbated,
and in a pass of practiceRequite him for your father.
I will do't:
And, for that purpose, I'llanoint my sword.
I bought an unction of amountebank
So mortal that but dip a knifein it,
Where it draws blood nocataplasm so rare,
Collected from all simples thathave virtue Under the moon
can save the thing from deathThat is but scratch'd withal:
I'll touch my point With thiscontagion,
that, if I gall him slightly, Itmay be death.
Let's further think of this;
Weigh what convenience both oftime and means
May fit us to our shape.
If this should fail,
And that our drift look throughour bad performance,
'Twere better not assay'd:
therefore this project Shouldhave a back or second,
that might hold, If this didblast in proof.
Soft!
Let me see.
We'll make a solemn wager onyour cunnings.
O, I ha't.
When in your motions you are hotand dry--
As make your bout more violentto that end--
And that he calls for drink,
I'll have preffer'd him Achalice for the nonce,
whereon but sipping,
If he by chance escape yourvenom'd stuck,
Our purpose may hold there.
Stay. What noise?
One woe doth tread uponanother's heels.
So fast they follow.
Your sister's drown'd, Laertes.
Drown'd!
O, where?
There is a willow grows aslantthe brook
That shows his hoar leaves inthe glassy stream;
There with fantastic garlands
she would make of daisies,crow-flowers, nettles,
and long purples which liberalshepherds give a grosser name,
But our cold maids do dead men'sfingers call them:
There, on the pendent boughs
her coronet weeds Clambering tohang,
an envious sliver broke;
When down her weedy trophies andherself
Fell in the weeping brook.
Her clothes spread wide;
And, mermaid-like, awhile theybore her up:
Which time she chanted snatchesof old lauds;
As one incapable of her owndistress
Or like a creature native andindued Unto that element:
but long it could not be Tillthat her garments,
heavy with their drink,
Pull'd the poor wretch from hermelodious lay
To muddy death.
Alas, then, she is drown'd?
Drown'd, drown'd.
Too much of water hast thou,poor Ophelia.
And therefore I forbid my tears.
But yet It is our trick; natureher custom holds,
Let shame say what it will.
When these are gone, the womanwill be out!
Adieu, my lord:
I have a speech of fire thatfain would blaze,
But that this folly douts it.
Let's follow, Gertrude:
How much I had to do to calm hisrage.
Now fear I this will give itstart again.
Therefore let's follow.